Apply ITIL® management practices
Recall that ITIL 4 defines a practice as a set of organizational resources designed for performing work or accomplishing an objective. While ITIL 4 includes the 34 practices shown here, Foundation covers the purpose for 18 of them, the ones shown here in bold, and covers further details for seven of them, the ones highlighted here. These details include how they fit within the service value chain. Here are some ways you might apply the ITIL Foundation concept of management practices. For the first way, enacting and enabling outcomes, you might want to understand whether or not the organization shares or is driving towards a common set of practice outcomes. For the second way, enlightening and empowering people, you'll want to understand what the vehicles are that are available for developing the skills, knowledge, and mindset to drive practices towards their outcomes. For the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers, you'll want to understand which of the practices are in place and functioning well and which are not, and what the blockers are for those that are not in place. For the fourth way, improving moments of truth, you'll want to understand the key moments of truth for each practice, and what good looks like for these in your organization, both for the interaction and for the setting it takes place in. For the fifth way, rooting out variation and dependencies, you'll want to understand to what extent practices are shared and to what extent they're varied in the organization. For the sixth way, lowering transaction costs, you'll want to understand where a lack of shared practices is causing lots of extra effort in communication and rework. And finally, for the seventh way, individual team and organizational reflection and action, you'll want to see what practices have been adopted by you, your team, and the organization and how they're the same and different.

Apply general management practices
Continual improvement is the practice of aligning an organization's practices and services with changing business needs. Through the ongoing identification and improvement of all elements involved in the effective management of products and services. Let's apply the concept of continual improvement methods, models, and techniques, using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL says to apply this principle we must know and do the things on the left on the table shown here. Review this list, and ask the questions on the right. Asking these questions should highlight some gaps you can fill with improvements. This is the practice of protecting an organization by understanding and managing risks. Risks to confidentiality, integrity and availability of information, and other risks like, authentication and non-repudiation. It's also about aligning an organization's practices and services with changing business needs, to ongoing identification and improvement of all elements of effective management of products and services. Let's apply it with the sixth way, lowering transaction costs. Have a look at the table. It shows an example of what you may have and what it costs to do things manually. You might be able to make do, or at some point you might take another approach. For example, in this case, to reduce the transaction cost of monitoring for security on a per server basis, or to increase the quality of our security monitoring outcomes. Relationship management is the practice of establishing and nurturing links, between an organization and its stakeholders at strategic and tactical levels. This practice extends the related ITIL V3 process of business relationship management to include relationships with all stakeholders. Let's use the fourth way, improve moments of truth, to apply the relationship management practice. Here's how. List key moments of truth by which you get customer feedback, your listening posts, both the interaction and its setting or medium. For example, you may have surveys, monitor support call volumes, or monitor social media sentiment, or talk directly to customers. How do you ask them to improve? How do you identify themes, and which ones to focus on, outcomes, metrics, accountability, and follow-up? Supplier management is the practice of ensuring your suppliers and their performance are managed appropriately to support seamless quality products and services. Let's apply the taxonomy of supplier relationships using the seventh way, reflecting and acting at the individual team and organizational levels. Here's how. Draw up a table as shown here. List all the suppliers and partners in the cells. Put a star next to the ones you think may be better off as a relationship type and note why. For example, you may have insourced printer support but a national printer support chain with great service and prices may just have opened down the block. It may be a no-brainer to outsource to them. Review the list and pick one and take action on. Let's apply using the fifth way, rooting out variations and dependencies. Make a table as shown here with column one as supplier management activities. Put a check in each cell where it's done. Rate each with colored smiley faces. Note where there are differences between what you do as a team and as an organization. Like where the organization does it but the team does not or where it's red for the team but not for the organization.

Service management practices, part 1
Availability management is the practice of ensuring services deliver agreed levels of availability to meet customer and user needs. Think of it as what we do to keep things up and running and if they go down, to get them up quick. Let's apply the availability management practice using the second way, enlighten and empower people. ITIL cites the availability-related metrics shown here. Which of these do you track as an individual, as a team, as an organization? How's that working for you? Do you see any benefit to changing what you track? Let's use the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers to apply this concept. Write down this list shown here, then add four columns. One, barriers, two, actions to minimize or eliminate barriers, three, enablers, and four, actions to add or amplify enablers. Fill these out and cherry pick a few to act on for quick wins. Capacity and performance management is the practice of ensuring services achieved agreed and expected performance, satisfying current and future demands in a cost-effective way. Let's apply using the seventh way, reflecting and acting at the individual, team and organizational level. Here's how. ITIL defines performance, service performance and capacity as shown here. Is this how you define these terms? As an individual, how about your team? How about your organization? How's that working for you? Is there a difference between how you do it for your traditional IT environment versus your cloud environment? Let's use the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers to apply these activities. Listed here are the activities ITIL associates with capacity and performance management. Write down this list. Add four columns. One, barriers, two, actions to minimize or eliminate barriers, three, enablers, and four, actions to add or amplify enablers. Fill these out and choose some quick wins. Change control is the practice of ensuring that we accurately assess risk, authorize the right changes and manage a change schedule to maximize the number of successful IT changes. Let's use the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers to apply capacity and performance management activities. ITIL says change control requires striking the balance shown in the figure. Write these two down. Add four columns. First, barriers, second, actions to minimize or eliminate them, third, enablers, and fourth, actions to add or amplify them. Fill these out. I've done a few to add a better balance here.

Service management practices, part 2
Incident management is the practice of minimizing the negative impact of incidents by restoring normal service operation as quickly as possible. Incident management goes after things that are broken to get them fixed quickly, and where things that are broken can range from a service being down to a user having trouble using a new feature in their software. Let's use way number four, improve moments of truth, to apply here. ITIL has the advice shown here for incident management. List these pieces of advice on a whiteboard. Now create a column and write in one recent instance of a moment of truth for each. For that moment of truth, ask, how could we have improved the interaction? Now ask, how could we have improved the setting in which the action took place? Use the answers as a basis for quick win improvements. Let's apply using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL lists who may be involved in incident diagnosis and resolution as shown here. Write these down. Then assign percentages to each for each month of the past year. Push hard for real data. What's it telling you? Do you see a basis for action to try to change the distribution of percentages? For example, to have more fixed through self-help. The IT asset management practice is the practice of planning and managing the full life cycle of all IT assets. Its purpose is to help the organization maximize value, control costs, manage risks, support decision-making about the purchase, reuse, and retirement of assets, and to meet regulatory and contractual requirements. Let's apply this practice using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL cites the scope of IT asset management as shown here. Write these down and create two columns, in scope and out of scope. And write in examples of things that are in and out of scope for each. Note areas where because of technology changes, you should consider changing scope, and where there are differences in scope in your additional IT and cloud mobile environments. Asking these questions will highlight gaps you can close through improvements. Let's apply using the fifth way, rooting out variation and dependency. List the assets shown here. Next, add two columns, rational variations and irrational variations. What you're trying to do is to identify and understand as a group through this exercise where it's okay to vary and where doing so causes breakdowns, rework, and stress. For the latter, identify actions to remediate where doing so will be worth the effort. Let's employ the seventh way to apply the IT asset management activities shown here. List these on a whiteboard, then add columns, individual, team, and organization. Make notes on what you do for each at each level. Make special note of where there's fit and split between levels. Is that a problem for you? If it is, write down some actions you can take to remediate it.

Service management practices, part 3
Monitoring and event management is the practice of systematically observing services and service components, and recording and reporting selected changes of state identified as events. Let's use way number four, improving moments of truth, to apply this practice. Here's how. The three types of events are shown here. List them, then for each, list specific events you have stood up, for example, an informational when a log has been cut, a warning when circuit utilization has reached 25%, or an exception when a switch is down. For each, discuss how you might improve either the interaction or the setting, or medium, like which channel or channels alerts come in on, with an eye towards doing better in the moment of truth next time. Let's use the first way, enact and enable outcomes, to apply the processes and procedures shown here. Think of each of these as outcomes to reach. List them. Then ask, what can we do to enable these outcomes? Brainstorm a list of things to do and pick some to do. For example, you might find adding a checklist to a Kanban board might go a long way towards ensuring the first one gets done well. Let's apply the monitoring and event management practice using the sixth way. Examine the guideline shown here that ITIL cites for human intervention and automation. Pick a critical service. Get the lead engineers to brainstorm a list of the most time-consuming tasks for that service. Then, for each of the top five tasks, brainstorm ways to reduce or eliminate manual effort. Problem management is the practice of reducing the likelihood and impact of incidents by identifying actual and potential causes of incidents, and managing workarounds and known errors. Let's apply this concept using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. Examine the figure. This contrasts the definition of a problem and an incident. Do you distinguish between a problem and incident in this way? Does your team? How 'about your organization? One vital part of managing something is to name it and distinguish it in a common way. Is there any difference between how you make these distinctions, for example, on your traditional IT and cloud environments? How's that working for you? Let's apply the fourth way, improve moments of truth, to the three distinct phases of problem management shown here. Pick a service. For that service, note, A, the last big outage, B, the symptom causing the most service desk ticket volume, and C, the symptom causing the most service desk effort. For each brainstorm, how do we avoid it? How do we detect it faster? And how do we reduce user calls when it does happen? And lastly, how do we recover more quickly?

Service management practices, part 4
Release management is the practice of making new or changed services and features available for use. Let's apply the release management practice using the sixth way: lowering transaction costs. ITIL cites that things shown here as typical release components list the major releases you've deployed in the past year. Next, no where releases did or did not include the components cited here. If and where these components were missing or inadequate, can you think of instances where that was later a problem for you? If so, write these instances down along with actions to take to improve on for next time. Consider your most important service. List capabilities users consume from it as in the example shown here by asking what might the user say is broken when they call the service desk. For each capability, ask could you manage versions of this capability separate from others or could you split your user base into deployment ranks so that you could have one group on the new and others on the current version. Let's apply using the sixth way: lowering transaction costs. Examine the figure. Recall the last time your team worked all weekend on a problematic change. What was the architecture of the service? Could you spin up an identical instance in the cloud, could you move the load to the cloud to upgrade the main instance, move the load back to the freshly upgraded main instance, would that be useful? Were you able to easily move the load back to the freshly upgraded main instance? Would it be useful if you could? Service configuration management is the practice of ensuring that accurate and reliable information about the configuration of services and the configurations of what supports them is available when and where needed. This includes information on how the items are configured and the relationships among configuration items. Let's apply using the fifth way: rooting out variation and dependency. The figure shown here lists typical types of configuration items. Now list each capability of your most critical service. To identify them, ask what will users say is broken when they call the service desk? For the most critical one, list dependencies including buildings, people, processes, software, settings and so on. Use this figure to check for gaps and pick a subset of gaps to work on as improvements. Now let's apply using the second way: enlightening and empowering people. In the figure, we see service configuration compared to IT asset management. For your most critical service, list the physical and logical assets you can configure. 

Service management practices, part 5
Service continuity management is the practice of ensuring that we maintain service availability and performance at a sufficient level in the event of a disaster. A disaster's a sudden, unplanned event causing great damage or serious loss to an organization. Let's apply this practice using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL distinguishes service continuity and business continuity management, as shown here. Do you make this distinction? Do you have a BCM plan that dovetails into your SCM plan? What accommodations do you make for BCM on the SCM side, and vice versa? What are some simple things you can do to improve this? The service desk is the practice of capturing demand for incident resolutions and service requests. These are handled by incident and service request management practices, respectively. The service desk is the entry point and single point of contact for the service provider with all its users. Let's use the fourth way, improving moments of truth to apply the service desk practice. ITIL lists channels for accessing the service desk, as depicted here. From the IT perspective, list the pros and cons of allowing each channel. Now do it again from the user perspective. Consider whether you should add, remove, or change any of the channels to improve the setting of a moment of truth of service desk interaction. Let's use the fourth way, improving moments of truth to apply here. Here, we see the technologies ITIL says supports centralized and virtualized service desk practices. Which do you use? How's that working for you? What's the difference in the technologies you use to support traditional IT, versus your cloud and mobile environment? Why is there a difference? How's that working for you? Let's apply this practice once again, using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. Here, we see service desk staff required competencies, as cited by ITIL. For your most critical service, list individuals who support it as rows, and create columns for each competency. In each cell, rate each individual as low, medium or high for that cell. What can you do to improve the lowest ratings?

Service management practices, part 6
Service level management is the practice of setting clear business-based targets for service performance, so we can properly assess, manage, and monitor the delivery of a service. A service level is a set of measurable parameters defining expected or achieved service quality. Let's apply the service level management practice using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL specifies how service level management provides end to end visibility into services as shown here. Is this what you do? If not, is that a problem for you? If you do do it, what benefits are you accruing as a result? Is there any one area of the four shown here where better knowledge, skills, mindsets, or resources would make a big difference in the results you're seeing? Let's use the first way, enact and enable outcomes, to apply here. Create four columns as shown, and for rows, list the skills and competencies for service level management, relationship management, business liaison, supplier management, and business analysis. In each intersecting cell, write the outcome, completing the phrase, "Performance is effective when?" List some ideas for enabling each outcome. Let's apply the service request management practice using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL lists the key requirements for successful SLAs, as shown here. Put them down as column headings. List your services as rows, and in the intersection, rate them red, yellow, green, or gray, depending on whether you're meeting them or not, and if that's a problem for you. Let's apply this practice using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL lists the information sources for service level management as depicted in the figure. For the service most frustrating your users, ask. How do you know that it's frustrating your users? What is the best way to quantify, understand, and measure the frustration. Is it in one of the boxes in the figure? Service request management is the practice of supporting the agreed quality of a service by handling all predefined user-initiated service requests in an effective and user friendly manner. Service request are requests from a user or a user's authorized representative that initiates a service action 

Apply the deployment management practice
Deployment management is the practice of moving new or changed hardware, software, processes, documentation, or other service components to the live and testing and staging environments. Continuous integration and continuous delivery, or CICD, is an integrated set of practices and tools to merge code and to build, test, package resulting software to be ready for deployment. Let's apply the deployment management practice using the fourth way, improving moments of truth. Here we see the relationship between deployment, change and release management. List the steps in your most recent release of a service. Were there two distinct steps, deploy and release? Was the service usable right after deployment, or was there a step to make it live? Should you change anything here? Let's apply this practice again using the second way, enlighten and empower people. Here we see the distinct approaches for deployment depicted in the figure. Think about the past year. Which of these approaches did you use? How often? Are there approaches that you did not use? Are there approaches you used more than others? Is there one approach that you prefer? Which approaches have you taken for your critical services? Let's apply this practice using the first way, enacting and enabling outcomes. Here we see the deployment management considerations ITIL sites. Build a matrix. Make the first cell, Performance is effective when. This is your outcome. Then list your top three services in the next three rows. Create columns for each consideration as in the image above. In each cell, list one improvement opportunity. Another way to apply the deployment management practice is with the sixth way, lowering transaction costs. Assume service X is our production e-commerce site. You'll want DEV, TEST, and Production instances of the service. But can you further evolve production into more deployment rings so you can learn? For your e-commerce site, are there certain regions where you currently see fewer sales? Should you put those regions into early bird production deployment rings? Should you stand up an early bird production deployment ring where first the cost of failure is lower, and second the opportunity for growth is there? In this case, would you deploy production updates to that deployment ring for a week 