What your ITIL® Foundation course covered
ITIL Foundation covers 19 key concepts of service management, four dimensions of service management, the five components of the service value system, the six activities of the service value chain, seven guiding principles, and 18 of the 34 ITIL management practices. Let's review quickly before we dive in. ITIL Foundation covers the 19 key service management concepts shown here. Note that there are fewer than 19 bullets, as certain topics are treated as pairs, for example, utility and warranty. Also note that utility and warranty are listed twice. This is not a mistake, as they're examined in two ways. First, in the context of services and service management and then in the context of value. ITIL Four includes the four dimensions of service management shown here: organizations and people, information and technology, partners and suppliers, and value streams and processes. Think of the four dimensions as the right scope of consideration for anything in service management, from a change to a risk to a project. The service value system shows how all the components and activities of an organization work as a system to enable value creation. It's five components are shown here. Guiding principles, governance, service value chain, practices and continual improvement. Along with inputs, opportunity and demand and the output, value. Recall that ITIL Four foundation covers the service value chain. Its interconnected set of six activities supports value streams and the inputs, outputs and purpose of each from plan to improve to engage to design and transition to obtain/build to deliver and support. A guiding principle is a universal enduring maxim that guides an organization across changing time and circumstances. A north star guiding light informing thousands of decisions and actions everyday in organizations. ITIL Four introduces the seven guiding principles shown here detailing their nature, use and interaction. ITIL four defines a practice as a set of organizational resources designed for performing work or achieving an objective. ITIL Four includes the 34 practices shown here. Foundation covers the purpose for 18 of them, the ones shown here in bold. And provides details for the seven highlighted here including fit within the service value chain.