Apply service value system
For service management to function properly it has to work as a system. That's why ITIL foundation covers the ITIL service value system or SVS with it's five components shown here. The SVS describes how all components and activities of the organization work together as a system to enable value creation. Key inputs to the system are opportunity and demand and the key output is stakeholder value. Let's have a look at how to apply the ITIL service value system using each of the seven ways, starting with the first way, enacting and enabling outcomes. Here, you might want to understand whether or not the organization shares or is driving towards a common set of principles. For the second way, enlightening and empowering people, you'll want to understand what the vehicles are that are available for learning about the terminology, key principles and models and what support is available for implementing the concepts. For the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers, you may want to understand which of the key principles and models are in place and which are not and what the blockers are for those that are not in place. For the fourth way, improving moments of truth, you'll want to understand the organization's posture to change as you move towards a moment of truth of introducing a key principle or model. For the fifth way, rooting out variation and dependencies, you'll want to understand to what extent terminology is shared and to what extent it is varied in the organization. For the sixth way, lowering transaction costs, you'll want to understand where a lack of shared language is causing lots of extra effort in communication and rework. And finally, for the seventh way, individual, team and organization reflection and action, you'll want to see what terminology and key principles and models have been adopted by your team. Let's apply using the fourth way, improving moments of truth. List key moments of truth where you detect opportunity and demand or someone or something presents you with it. Review the list asking what listening posts have you established for opportunity and demand? At what interval and by what means do you detect strategic and large scale shifts of opportunity and demand? Ask are these moments of truth sufficient in frequency or quality? If the issue is frequency, consider what instances you should add to your rhythm of the business and patterns. If the issue is quality of these moments of truth, ask what can we do that is most effective for tweaking these listening posts? Either the interaction itself or its setting. For value, list your services and for each, list moments of truth where for each stakeholder group you pull stakeholder perception of value and where someone or something pushes it to you. Ask whether you can improve the frequency or quality or completeness of stakeholders involved. This should yield useful next steps for tweaking your opportunity, demand and value feedback loops.

Apply service value system components
The first component of the SVS is the seven ITIL guiding principles. They're recommendations that can guide an organization in all circumstances regardless of changes in its goals, strategies, type of work, management structure and so on as they are universal and enduring. The guiding principles support effective actions and decisions and continual improvements of all types and at all levels. Let's apply with the fifth way: list the guiding principles. For each, list one thing you can do to add or amplify enablers then list one thing you can do to minimize or drop barriers. These could be simple things like for start where you are, perhaps there is no step in your STL seat to review what's available. Adding a simple bullet to your checklist could go a long way. Governance is how we direct and control an organization. Governance activities enable organizations to continually align their operations with the strategic directions set by the governing body. Let's apply the governance component of the service value system using the third way as in the example. For a service, list at least one barrier and one enabler to compliance with governance initiatives. For each, list one idea for how you might minimize or eliminate each barrier and add or amplify each enabler. Pick the most impactful ideas for your starter improvements. The service value chain is a set of interconnected activities that an organization performs to deliver a valuable product or service to its consumers. It facilitates value realization and it's also an operating model for service providers that covers all key activities to effectively manage products and services. Let's apply with the sixth way: list the activities in the service value chain down a column except for the service value chain then make a row column for each of the guiding principles. Note in cells where transaction costs are high and or where things are not ready to hand when trying to achieve outcomes of each service value chain activity. This should result in a list of potential improvements. ITIL foundation defines practices as sets of organizational resources designed for performing work or carrying out an objective. Let's apply with the fourth way: improving moments of truth. List the ITIL practices. For each, list a key moment of truth. For example, the cab meeting for change control, a post problem review for problem management or a major incident review for incident management. For each, list one concrete way you can improve the interaction and one concrete way you can improve the setting it takes place in. The continual improvement component of the service value system is about aligning an organization's practices and services with changing business needs. This happens to the ongoing identification and improvement of all elements involved and the effective management of products and services. For this concept, let's apply using the seventh way. List current improvement projects in three sets. Your organizations, your teams and yours as an individual. Ask where is there fit and split meaning divergence or convergence between what I'm doing as an individual contributor to improve and what my team and the organization is doing. How can I bring that into better harmony? You should have some improvement plans at all three levels and they should tie out. Let's apply using way number two: enlighten and empower people. List improvement initiatives from the past year. Be sure to include those that went well and those that didn't then for each of the seven steps in the continual improvement model, ask where did not having the skills, knowledge, mindset or resources to do the job result in defects, problems and rework in these steps in these instances. Let's apply the third way: lowering barriers and increasing enablers. List the steps in the continual improvement model. For each, consider each principle in turn, ask what are the barriers and enablers to applying the principle in this step? Be sure to cite real instances from recent improvement projects as evidence then ask where can we minimize or eliminate barriers for these and add or amplify enablers?