Apply key service management concepts
Let's walk through some ideas for how you might apply each of the seven ways to the key concepts of service management. The examples given here are not meant to be exhaustive, they're meant to give you a taste of how to apply each, since you have an idea of how to apply in your own situation. In the first way, enacting and enabling outcomes, you'll want to understand how the organization is doing against objectives for each service and for service management as a practice. Start by identifying the outcomes for each service and practice, and rating each as unknown, good, degraded or broken. In the second way, enlightening and empowering people, you'll want to know what services the organization delivers. Both in the customer view and from the internal technical view. Start by getting a look at customer facing experiences and assets, and for the internal view, technical information on service makeup, including service parts, features and qualities. For the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers, you'll want to understand which services and service management practices are underachieving, and what the barriers are. You can do this by listing current barriers for each service and practice that is not achieving desired outcomes. And for the fourth way, improving moments of truth, you'll want to know what the key interactions are for services and service management, and how that's working. The critical first step here is gaining agreement on what the key interactions are, and identifying the setting in which they take place. And for the fifth way, rooting out variation and dependencies, you'll want to understand the variations among customers and users and within services and in service management, including skill variations and technical variations, as significant variations are a key source of overhead and disruption. For the sixth way, lower transaction costs, you'll want to understand what's hard now, and why in the delivery and supportive services. This includes what's hard for consumers, customer and user experience, that's CS and UX, as well as what is hard internally, what's called EX, or employee experience. And finally, for the seventh way, individual team and organizational reflection and action, you'll want for sure to be able to articulate who your services and consumers are in your role as an individual contributor, provider and consumer of services, as well as for your team. Be clear on what you consume and provide.

Services and service management
Here we see the definition of a service. Note that ITIL defines value as the perceived benefit, usefulness and importance of something. Since stakeholders perceive value, it follows that value resides in the mind of stakeholders. So, as a provider, you must manage both the realty, and the perception of your services in the mind of your stakeholders. Let's apply the concept of service with the second way, enlightening and empowering people. Pick a service. List each part, and mark each with a dot to indicate its state as unknown or gray; critical or red; warning or degraded, yellow; or okay or green. For each part, list its owner and mark each with a dot in the same way. Focus where owners are unknown, and parts are critical or red. Service management is a set of specialized organizational capabilities. That is, how you manage, how you organize your processes, your knowledge and people. For directing and controlling services to achieve and continually maintain over time and through changes the desired state of providing value to customers and users in the form of services. How well managed and organized are you? What practices and processes do you use, and how are they working for you? What's your state of learning and knowledge? And what's the quality of your people relative to the work that needs to be done? Let's have a look at how we might apply the concept of service management capabilities using the fifth way, rooting out variations in dependencies. Here's how. Make this table and rate your capability to direct and control services in the categories of: management, organization, processes, knowledge and people, by marking each with a dot, to indicate its state as unknown or gray; critical or red; warning or degraded as yellow; or okay, which is green. Now ask, where are there significant variations and capabilities that are resulting in service issues? Here, we see the definitions of utility and warranty. The combination of utility and warranty should provide value. The key question is for each service, did we get the features and qualities right? And, is it resulting in value as perceived by the customer? Let's apply this concept using the third way, lower barriers and increase enablers. Here's how. Pick a service. Rate it on two dimensions on the following. First, does it have the right feature set? Second, does it have the right levels of availability, capacity, performance, service continuity or disaster recovery, and security? From this analysis, pick an area to work on. Typically, this will be the unknowns in the reds or yellow ones, first. Here, we see the ITIL definitions of customer, sponsor and user. Which are the roles that make up the aggregate role, consumer. Which is the primary stakeholder of service management. There are other stakeholders, like the community and society, charitable organizations and shareholders. Let's apply these concepts with the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers. Here's how. List your services, and for each, their provider: customers, users and sponsors, and suppliers and partners. Mark each with a dot to indicate the state. Unknown is gray, critical is red, warning or degraded is yellow, and okay is green. For those that are gray or unknown, take action to determine their state. For those that are red or yellow, use force field analysis to identify barriers and enablers to work on.

Create value with services
Here, we see the ITIL definitions of Value and Value Co-Creations, the modern idea that value flows multi-directionally amongst stakeholders, not just from provider to consumer unidirectionaly. How do we apply the ITIL concept of Value? As an example, let's employ the third way lowering barriers and increasing enablers. Here's how. List your Services, add columns for Perception of Value, and Relationship Status. Add sub-headings for Provider, Customer, User, Sponsor, and Suppliers and Partners. Now, mark each with a dot to indicate state. Red, yellow, green, gray and so on. Take action to improve the gray or unknown states first then work on the red or bad, and the yellow or degraded. Now, let's apply Value Co-Creation. Here again, we apply the third way. List your Services, and for each, bullet out the value contributions of the Provider and Consumer. Next, list Enablers and Barriers to those Value Contributions. Next, think through and write down some way you can minimize and eliminate Barriers and amplify or add Enablers. This list is a good start to actions to enhance Value Co-Creation. When acts as a service provider in organization produces outputs, it helps consumers achieve certain outcomes which you should see differ from outputs. When an acts as a service provider, an organization produces outputs. It help consumer achieve certain outcomes which you should see differ from outputs. For example, an output of a haircut maybe that the barber gave you a crew cut. The output of the service however, is that you and others think your hair looks good. Let's apply these concepts using the first way and act on enabled outcomes. Here's how. Create a table with your Services down the first column and Outcomes and Outputs in the second and third columns. List each of your Services down the first column based on your consumers', that's your customers, users and sponsors, view of the outcomes of each and the deliverables of each. Be honest. If you just do not know the facts, your actions clear. Turn it gray or unknown to a known. Here we see the ITIL definitions of Costs and Risks. Services both add and remove costs and risks for consumers. Let's apply the concept of Cost and Risk using the sixth way, lowering transaction costs. List your services down column one, add two columns for Costs and Risks. For each of your Services, rate from your consumer's perspective costs and risks for them in using your service. Push for data from the source, your consumers. Take notes for each, especially where the state is gray or unknown, yellow or degraded, or red and critical. There ratings and notes form the basis for your improvement actions. Here we see the ITIL definition of an organization. Organizations provide and consume services. For example, an organization that coordinates kayak trips fills the role of a provider when it sells a trip and the role of the consumer when applies to maintenance services for its fleet of kayaks. Let's apply the concept of organizations using the second way, enlighten and empower people. Here's how. Make a table of the organizations you want to work with, and see how well you can list the services they consume. 

Service relationships
Here we see the ITIL definition of a Service Offering which is how providers present services to consumers. Recall that Service Offerings may include good access to resources and service actions. Let's apply the concept of Service Offerings using the fifth way: rooting out variations and dependencies. Here's how. List your Service Offerings, add columns or variants and notes. Rate each Service Offering variant as gray, red, green, or yellow based on the degree to which the variations are rational with gray being unknown. Irrational variations typically are hard to manage, take time to maintain, and are expensive to provide, but are not frequently used or profitable. Use this exercise to re-focus your catalog. Here we see the ITIL definitions of Service Relationship and Service Relationship Management. Let's apply the concept of Service Relationships using the fourth way: improving moments of truth. Here's how. List your Service Relationships, add provision, consumption, and Relationship Management columns. Note in each your moments of truth. Rate the quality of each from your consumer's perspective using the different colored smiley-faces. You can use the output of this exercise to work on improving the interaction and setting for Service Relationships starting with those that are most broken. Let's apply the concept of Service Relationships using the seventh way: individual, team, and organizational level reflection in action. List all the services you provide and consume as an individual. Do the same for your team and organization. Rate the quality of those services using the smiley faces. This exercise should give you a grasp on how well what you do fits in with your team and your organization. ITIL defines the Service Provider as a role performed by an organization in a Service Relationship to supply services to consumers, and a Service Consumer as a role played by an organization in a Service Relationship to consume services. Let's apply the concepts of Service Provider and Consumer and Service Provision and Consumption with the second way: enlighten and empower people. Here's how. Make two lists. One of services you consumer as an individual, team, and organization. And one of the services you provide, again, as an individual, team, and organization. Note where there is fit and split between service consumed and provided at all three levels. Individual, team, and organization. What does that tell you? Ideally there would be a perfect fit and alignment among the three levels.