Apply the ITIL® guiding principles
Here we see the seven ITIL guiding principles. Recall that these are recommendations that can guide an organization in all circumstances, regardless of changes in its goals, strategies, type of work, or management structure, as they're universal and enduring. Let's have a look at how to apply them using each of the seven ways. For the first way, enacting and enabling outcomes, you might want to understand whether or not the organization shares or is driving towards a common set of technology. For the second way, enlightening and empowering people, you'll want to understand what the vehicles are that are available for learning about the terminology, key principles, and models and what support is available for implementing the concepts. For the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers, you may want to understand which of the key principles and models are in place and which are not, and what the blockers are for those that are not in place. For the fourth way, improving moments of truth, you'll want to understand the organization's posture towards change, as you move towards a moment of truth of introducing a key principle or model. For the fifth way, rooting out variation and dependencies, you'll want to understand to what extent terminology is shared and to what extent it is varied in the organization. For the sixth way, lowering transaction costs, you'll want to understand where a lack of shared language is causing lots of extra effort in communication and rework. And finally, for the seventh way, individual team and organizational reflection and action, you'll want to see what terminology and key principles and models have been adopted by your team.

Apply guiding principles, part 1
The first principle, Focus on Value, means everything we do must add value from the stakeholder's perspective. We must have a relentless focus on value in the organization by individuals and teams. The shared aim is to eliminate or reduce things that do not add value for stakeholder's and add and amplify things that do. Here's one way to apply this principle using the second way, Enlightening and Empowering people. Focusing on people's skills, knowledge and mindsets and empowering them for action. ITIL says to apply this first principle successfully, we must know and do the things on the left in the table shown here. To apply, review this list and ask the questions on the right. Work that is uninformed by what exists and is leverageable wastes a lot of resources. The second ITIL Four Guiding Principle is start where you are. Don't start from scratch. leverage what's already available, observe directly and fully understand the current state first, as there is likely a great deal in current services, processes, programs, projects, and people that you can use to create the desired outcome. We will apply this principle using the second way, Enlightening and Empowering people. ITIL says, to apply this principle successfully, we must know and do the things on the left of the table shown here. To apply, review this list and ask the questions on the right. The third principle is, Progress Iteratively with Feedback. Don't try to do everything at once, organize work into smaller, manageable sections done more often. Use feedback in each iteration to ensure actions are on track. We'll apply this principle using the second way, Enlightening and Empowering people. ITIL says to apply this principle successfully, we must know and do the things on the left in the table shown here. To apply, review this list and ask the questions on the right. The fourth principle, Collaborate and Promote Visibility, is about working together across boundaries for more buy-in and success, sharing information and building understanding and trust, and making work and consequences visible. This echoes DevOps, Agile and Lean practices of visible management, communication, and collaboration, breaking down silos and driving towards shared objectives. We can apply this principle with the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers. ITIL says to apply this principle, we must know and do the things on the left in the table shown here. Review this list and for the key elements on the right ask, what are the barriers to these and how do we eliminate or minimize them? What are the enablers for these and how to we amplify or add to them?

Apply guiding principles, part 2
Think and Work Holistically is the fifth ITIL guiding principle. Work on the service, not just its parts, integrate information, technology, organization, people, practices, partners, and agreements. You can de-optimize the whole by optimizing a part of the system. So you must understand the context and think up and out using synthetic thinking, and not just down and in, using analytical thinking. One way to apply this principle is with a third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers. ITIL says to apply this principle successfully, you must do the things on the left in the table shown here. Review the list and for the elements on the right, ask, what are the barriers to these, and how do we eliminate or minimize them? What are the enablers for these, and how do we amplify or add to them? Keep It Simple and Practical is about eliminating anything that provides no value, using the minimum number of steps to accomplish an objective, and using outcome based thinking for practical solutions and results. It's about removing bloated ways of doing things that may help you achieve outcomes, but inefficiently. It's also about keeping a focus on the ends in minds or outcomes, the why and for whom. Let's apply this using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL says to apply this principle successfully, you must know and do the things on the left on the table we see here. To apply, review this list and ask the questions on the right. Optimize and Automate is about using resources, particularly human ones, to best effect. It's about eliminating anything wasteful. Using technology to achieve whatever it can do, and only using human intervention where it adds value. This principle is about a relentless focus on automation to drive out unnecessary variation, dependencies, and waste. Let's apply this principle using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. ITIL says to apply this principle, we must know and do the things shown here. Review this list, and rate each using colored smiley faces for how you're doing. Gray for unknown, red for critically bad, yellow for degraded, and green for good. Use these ratings to zero in on the worst areas and to ideate improvements.