Apply the four dimensions
The four dimensions of service management represent perspectives that are critical to effectively and efficiently delivering value to customers and other stakeholders in the form of products and services. Let's have a look at each and how to apply them. If there was an ITIL tattoo this would be it. Organizations and people, information and technology, partners and suppliers, and value streams and processes. This is perhaps the easiest of all ITIL constructs to get value out of, nearly every minute of every day. Here's how to do it, applying the fourth way, improving moments of truth. When you're in your next meeting about a project, a risk, a change, or an incident or problem, ask yourself which of the bucket or buckets of these four dimensions is this conversation in, and which bucket or buckets are being skipped or treated too lightly, representing a risk or missed opportunity? Let's say you're discussing a project and 99% of the conversation is around technical specs for the project. What about the people bucket? What about knowledge transfer, training for the service desk, and so on? What about the suppliers? Do they need to be trained? You can add value in every single interaction if you simply click through these four buckets and ask some questions or provide some input related to the buckets that are being underrepresented in the conversation. Now don't break your brain doing it, the idea is not to search for relatively inconsequential stuff. But in my experience, almost without fail, if you tick through the four dimensions, you'll bring up a risk or an idea or a task or something that hadn't been thought of or discussed. You'll be able to add more value in every interaction. Who wouldn't want to do that? At the team level, it's the same thing. It's great when everyone is doing this, and as a team, you're expecting it and welcoming it. And it's part of the culture of how we do things around here. Typically, technical people overfocus on the technology bit, no big surprise there, right, after all we're technologists. But any of the four dimensions can be over or under focused on. What we're looking for here is, balance. PESTLE is acronym for the Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Legal, and Environmental factors that constrain or influence how a provider operates, and constrain how the organization can configure resources to address the four dimensions of service management. Let's apply the PESTLE model concept using the fourth way, improving moments of truth, here's how. List each of the PESTLE elements. For each, cite one example of how this factor has constrained, and one example of how it has influenced how you operate as a provider. Next, consider the moments of truth associated with each of these situations. What can you do to improve the interaction or setting these take place in?

Organizations and information dimensions
The organizations and people dimension focuses on how people and organizations are structured and managed. ITIL defines organizations as structured and managed groups of people with their own functions with roles, responsibilities, relationships and systems of authority and communication to achieve their objectives. Let's apply the people part of this dimension using the second way, enlighten and empower people. The figure shows what ITIL says we should pay attention to when it comes to people. List each of the elements shown here. Next to each, add a column with bullets under the heading what are we doing to enlighten people? That is, given the skills, knowledge and mindset needed to succeed here. Add another column, what more must we do? Brainstorm ideas under these two headings. Then add another column. What are we doing to empower people to succeed in this area and another, what more can we do? Brainstorm ideas for quick wins in issue areas. The information and technology dimension includes information management challenges, like security and regulatory compliance. Information is the information and knowledge used to deliver services and to manage all aspects of the service value system. Technology is the technology used to deliver services and to manage all aspects of the service value system. Let's apply the information portion of the information technology dimension using the fourth way, improving moments of truth. Here's how. ITIL says to judge information based on the criteria shown here. Think of a moment of truth where you had to make a critical assessment of the quality of some of the information. Is this the criteria that you used? What criteria will you use in the next similar moment of truth? Let's use the sixth way, lower transaction costs, to apply to this dimensions. List the key information and technology resources for you and your team and organization in two parts. One of the information and technology that makes up your services and another for what you use to manage services, including what you use to deal with information management challenges like security and regulatory compliance. Add columns for rating notes and action. For each item, consider how hard it is to do things you do often. Write as gray for unknown, red for broken, yellow for degraded and green for good and note your rationale. Note actions for the worst case reds or yellows. For grays or unknowns, your action is to get them to a known state. The idea is to grasp where transaction costs are high and to lower them.

Partners and process dimensions
ITIL defines partners as third-party providers of goods and services and suppliers as stakeholders responsible for providing services used. Relationships between partners and suppliers and a provider can include flexible partnerships, formal agreements, and contracts for delivery of goods or services like hardware, software, network, telecommunications and outsourced services. Let's apply this dimension with the second way, enlightening and empowering people. List all your partners and suppliers and designate them as such in a another column. Then indicate the nature of the agreement you have with them. Flexible agreement, formal partnership or contract. Next, consider what are you doing to empower each partner and supplier? How about enlightening them? Where would orientation or training be mutually beneficial? What more could you do that would be of mutual benefit, especially things that are easy to do with disproportionate benefits? And how is your organization's strategy for using partners and suppliers influenced by your organization's goals, culture and business environment? Use these questions to start enlightening and empowering. ITIL defines a value stream as a set of steps an organization takes to create and deliver products and services to consumers. It's a combination of the organization's value chain activities consisting of both value and non-value-added activity. It defines a process as a set of interrelated or interacting activities and define action sequences and dependencies that transform defined inputs into defined outputs. Let's use the sixth way, lowering transaction costs and making things ready to hand to apply they concept of value streams. Take any often-repeated important thing that your team does and list its steps. For each, note what's hard, what takes a lot of time, effort, resources, money and clicks to do. Then ask why. Your goal is to identify things causing waste in the system. Finding just one is a quick win. Let's apply these concepts using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. Ask what is the delivery model for the service and how does it work? What value streams are involved in delivering agreed service outputs? Who or what performs the required service actions? Rate each value stream in terms of its delivery on its outputs and outcomes. Use these ratings to prioritize improvements.