Apply the ITIL® service value chain
The service value chain is a set of interconnected activities that an organization performs to deliver a valuable product or service to its consumers and to facilitate value realization. It's an operating model for service providers. It covers all key activities to effectively manage and produce services and products. Here are some ways you might apply the second ITIL foundation concept of the service value chain. The first way, enacting and enabling outcomes, you'll want to know what objectives the organization has for these value chain activities. Also, how do they compare to what ITIL describes and how are you doing against those objectives? For the second way, enlightening and empowering people, you'll want to understand, especially for the activities that most of your work traverses, what learning loops are in place and how people get support for action. For the third way, lowering barriers and increasing enablers, you'll want to understand the key blockers in each activity in the chain, especially for those activities where you spend most of your time contributing and also what has been put in place to move things along. For the fourth way, improving moments of truth, you'll definitely want to understand the key interactions you and your team has in each of these activities and with whom as a basis for making them better as your work proceeds. For the fifth way, rooting out variations and dependencies, you'll want to understand how varied the inputs and outputs are for each activity. For example, does everyone include a health model in their service design? Do we all start with the same templates and checklists for service designs and transitions? And so on. For the sixth way, lowering transaction costs, you want to understand what's hard in each activity in the chain. What takes a lot of time, effort, and clicks to do? Do this especially for work and activities that you traverse often. And finally, for the seventh way, individual team and organizational reflection and action, you'll want to understand your role and that of your team in each of these value chain activities, especially those you work in often.

Apply value chain activities, part 1
The purpose of the plan value chain activity is to ensure a shared understanding of the vision, status and improvement direction from all four dimensions and products and services across the organization. Let's apply this activity using the second way, enlightening and empowering people. Here's how. This key activities involved in the plan activity and the roles involved in them. For each role ask, where does this role not have the skills, knowledge, mindset or resources required for the job, and where does that run us into trouble. The most acute areas with the easiest and cheapest remedies are where to start your improvement efforts. The purpose of the improve value chain activity is to ensure continual improvement of products, services and practices across all value chain activities, and all four dimensions of service management. For the improve activity of the service value chain, we'll apply using the sixth way, lowering transaction costs and making things ready to hand. Here's how. Start with the inputs and outputs of the improve activity. For example, one input is stakeholder feedback provided by engage, and one output is improvement status reports for all value chain activities. How can you lower the amount of effort and clicks it takes to get stakeholders feedback? How can you make improvement status reports more ready to hand. The purpose of this value chain activity is to provide a good understanding of stakeholder needs, transparency, and continual engagement and good relationships with all stakeholders. For the engage activity of the service value chain, let's apply using the fourth way, improve moments of truth. Here's how. List the moments of truth in the engage activity under the three headings shown here. For each, list the key moments of truth. For each of those, note key instances of these in the past 18 months. Rate each instance using the gray, red, yellow and green system. Pick the worst ones and ask, how can we improve these interactions and they're setting by adding or amplifying enablers and removing or minimizing barriers. Note that Unlike the ITIL v3 service lifecycle, there is no waterfall-ish stepwise relationship among these activities. So, it's best to think of each of the service value chain activities as a bucket of like or related tasks that get invoked when necessary, when triggered, and certainly not a waterfall.

Apply value chain activities, part 2
The purpose of this value chain activity is to ensure that products and services continually meet stakeholder expectations for quality, costs, and time to market. For the design and transition activity of the service value chain, we'll apply using the fifth way, root out variation and dependency. Here's how. Examine the inputs and outputs of this activity in your ITIL foundation materials. For example, one input is service components from obtain slash build and one output is requirements and specification from obtain slash build. Now list some major designs and transitions over the past 18 to 36 months. Was there any variation in how you specified or delivered these inputs or outputs? Was that a problem for you? The purpose of this value chain activity is to ensure that service components are available when and where needed and meet agreed specifications. Let's apply with way number two, enlighten and empower people. Here's how. List some instances of obtain slash build activity over the past 18 months. Then ask, where did not having the skills, knowledge, mindset, or resources to do the job result in defects, problems, and rework in these specific instances in inputs and outputs? The most acute areas with the easiest and cheapest remedies are where to start your improvement efforts. The purpose of this value chain activity is to ensure that we deliver and support services according to agreed specifications and stakeholder expectations. For the delivery and support activity of the service value chain, we'll apply using the fourth way, improve moments of truth. Here's how. List key moments of truth in delivery and support in the past 18 months. Rate each using the gray, red, yellow, and green system. Pick a set of the worst ones and ask, how can we improve these interactions by adding or amplifying enablers or by removing or minimizing barriers? Ask the same question for the setting these interactions take place in. This exercise should produce a list of improvements.